+++
author = ""
+++



# Introduction to the Industrial Revolution
The most tremendous and valuable shift in the development of modern human history is industrialization. The first Industrial Revolution began in Great Britain in 1760. It started spreading to other parts of Europe and North America in the early 1800s. By 1840, industrialization had become widespread around the world. The Industrial Revolution transformed economies that had been based on agriculture and handicrafts into economies based on large-scale industry, mechanized manufacturing, and the factory system. New machines, new power sources, and new ways of organizing work made existing industries more productive and efficient. The global reorganization spawned by the Industrial Revolution generated both benefits and detriments. An in-depth discussion into these matters cannot be held though without knowing the causes of the Industrial Revolution.

# Causes of the Industrial Revolution
Several causes have been identified for the Industrial Revolution, including, but not limited to, the emergence of capitalism, Europeans Imperialism, mining of resources, and the effects of the Agricultural Revolution. 

Capitalism referred to as laissez-faire capitalism or free-market capitalism was a central component of the rise of industrialization. This type of capitalism wanted the government to stay out of the economy and would allow individuals to carry out their own economic activities. This was a revolutionary concept because previous centuries used the dominant economic system of mercantilism, which favored heavy government control and regulation. This new economy also shifted power away from businesses and into the hands of consumers. 
 
European Imperialism was another major factor in the Industrial Revolution and played a vital role. Imperialism occurs when a powerful nation takes over or dominates a weaker nation. The powerful nation created during the Age of Imperialism had access to money and quite a bit of raw materials which could be used to produce goods in factories. An example of this would be the Trade Triangle. Also, European Imperialism provided the resources necessary to begin mass production of goods and establish trade routes. This meant that any goods produced in European factories could be shipped and sold to markets around the world. Since goods were being able to be produced on a much larger scale, this helped expand industrialization globally. 
 
Resources, including coal and iron, were also important to the processes of industrialization.  Since coal was a necessary ingredient in the industrial process, Great Britain kept vast reserves of it. After all, coal was used to fuel steam engines, ships, and all sorts of machinery as well as smelting iron ores. Coal was easily obtainable in Great Britain because it was relatively close to the surface and easier for miners to find and extract it. However, in many other places around the world, they had to improve the techniques used for mining coal because it was not as easy.
 
Lastly, the effects created by the Agricultural Revolution led to revolutionizing the methods of intensive farming, which included new farming techniques, the use of machinery in farming, and the increase of private land ownership. This allowed British farmers to produce more food faster and needed fewer people to do it.  Since fewer people were needed on the farms, people were able to move away and go to the towns and cities where factories and mines were being established. Therefore, the Agricultural Revolution was an important cause of the Industrial Revolution by allowing for a larger workforce for the factories and mines. 
 
There are debatably several main causes of the Industrial Revolution, but the ones listed above are some of the most notable.

# Benefits of the Industrial Revolution
The Industrial Revolution was a period when machine power/manufacturing was substituted for human power. The advancements and changes in technology made it more economical to manufacture goods in factories than at home, which fundamentally transformed society. This societal change that ended the dominance of agriculture continues today. Some of the advantages of the Industrial Revolution were the evolution of labor-saving inventions, more affordable and accessible goods, increased job opportunities, enhanced wealth and quality of life, the evolution of medicine, and the rise of specialized positions. 

Labor-saving inventions were developed and rapidly produced. New types of tools and machines were used on farms and revolutionized the industry because they allowed for much more efficiency in planting and harvesting crops. Additionally, other inventions, as seen on the [timeline](/timeline/), meant advances in manufacturing to enable people to no longer have to physically exert themselves to get the work done.

Factories and manufacturing facilities were built to enable goods to be more affordable and accessible. The machines within these factories produced items faster and cheaper than could have ever been accomplished by hand, which increased production and efficiency. Machines also made significant improvements in quality because the machines worked more accurately than a person would have. As stated by the principles of supply and demand, as the surplus of various items increased, the cost to the consumer decreased making goods more affordable. Additionally, the new transportation invented during the Industrial Revolution made it easier and cheaper to transport goods, which allowed businesses to create an international presence for their commodities. 

As the factories began to be built, it allowed people an opportunity to earn a living that was different than it had been in the past. This increased job opportunities for many people during the Industrial Revolution. No longer did it require specialized skills to earn a wage. This brought on drastic changes for women as many of them entered the workforce for the first time.

The mass production that occurred during the Industrial Revolution provided a much lower cost of manufactured goods, such as tools, clothes, and other household items. This allowed them to save money for other things and build personal wealth. Additionally, people were moving to cities and being employed by factories, which paid better wages than farm-related positions had. This extra income afforded people the opportunity to invest in profitable businesses and, thereby, substantially increase their wealth. In addition to increased wealth, people had access to healthier diets, better housing, and education which provided a much better quality of life. 

The Industrial Revolution had a large impact on medical advancements. Industrialization allowed medical instruments to be produced quickly and refinements could be made more efficiently. Better care could also be provided because scientists were able to discover many new cures for diseases that had previously been incurable. Because of the new transportation methods created during the Industrial Revolution, these cures and treatments could be dispersed and communicated quickly among physicians. Additionally, the government was forced to improve living conditions to create better sanitation, which helped to lower the risk of disease.

The rise of specialized positions during the Industrial Revolution was due, in part, to factory workers needing the training to perform specialized tasks. This additional training would increase the factories’ overall efficiencies and, therefore, bring in more money for the business owners. As factories grew and workers became more specialized, there was a need to pass on these specialized skills to new workers, so additional trainers and teachers were employed. Not only were factory workers specialized skills in demand, but also the need for the skillsets of builders, physicians, and lawyers since the cities were growing at a rapid rate.

# Detriments of the Industrial Revolution
While the Industrial Revolution had several positive effects and improved our quality of life, it also had some shortcomings.  Overcrowding of cities, pollution, illness, dangerous working conditions, and child labor were just a few of the downsides of the Industrial Revolution. 

As more and more people came to the cities in search of work in factories, cities were not prepared to handle them. There was no place for these migrants to live, so they were forced to live with several other people in cellars of houses, which had dirt floors and no ventilation or sanitation. Because of all the additional people, there were also sewage and sanitation problems that arose that contaminated the drinking water. The result of this overcrowding forced a majority of Great Britain into poverty. This, in turn, led to a higher rate of crime. To establish the balance of crime, The Metropolitan Police Act of 1829 was established to help create order and balance during the Industrial Revolution.

It is common knowledge that the Industrial Revolution came with pollution and environmental damage. In fact, the world’s modern environmental problems of widespread water and air pollution, reductions in biodiversity, destruction of wildlife habitats, and even global warming can be traced back to industrialization. The rise of machines used in factories required fossil fuels to make them run, which resulted in smog and air pollution being exhausted into cities worldwide. Chemicals were also needed for various processes in manufacturing and these chemicals were improperly disposed of and caused environmental issues. Additionally, due to the influx of people to cities, forests and farmlands were cleared to make room for needed infrastructure. This caused waste to be dumped in rivers and rivers becoming polluted. These pollutants put the condition of the ecosystem in jeopardy. 

While the Industrial Revolution made Great Britain rich, it also made them very sick. Disease, such as smallpox, tuberculosis, and cholera, accounted for many deaths in industrial cities during the Industrial Revolution. The dire consequences of these diseases were intensifying as Great Britain's streets became increasingly crowded. Migrant workers had very little knowledge of sanitary care and no knowledge as to what caused disease, so disease spread quickly throughout the cities. Even though there was a vaccine for Smallpox, very few people in the cities knew about it. And some diseases, such as tuberculosis and cholera, were caused by contaminated water because sewage was being allowed to come into contact with drinking water. It is notable to say that these diseases rarely affected the wealthy aristocrats as they were not crammed into factories or forced to drink contaminated water.

Life was not easy during the Industrial Revolution. Working conditions were poor, difficult, and dangerous. Worker safety and wages were not important to business owners. Factory workers were expected to work long hours, often 14-16 hours per day six days per week. They didn’t get time off for holidays or vacations. If they choose not to work those hours or if they got sick or injured on the job and missed work, they often got fired. After all, they had plenty of other people willing to fill those positions. Additionally, the machines and factories were often dirty and had no safety features. Losing a finger or a limb was not uncommon. The work areas they were subjected to were cramped with poor ventilation, and they were exposed to smoke, heavy metals, dust, and solvents. These kinds of working conditions were not ideal and there was a real concern around potential fire hazards. The smallest spark could have ignited and set off a blaze or explosion.

Since the Industrial Revolution saw the rise of factories in need of workers, children were ideal employees. Children could be paid less and were less likely to organize and strike against their working conditions. Unfortunately, children endured some of the harshest working conditions because they were often the ones that would have to unjam machinery. Their small stature would allow their little fingers, arms, and legs to easily reach into the machines. However, they were often caught in the machines, which caused major injury or even death. 

# Conclusion to the Industrial Revolution
In conclusion, there is no doubt that the Industrial Revolution had a major impact on the transformation of Great Britain and the entire world. The advantages and shortcomings of this generation are a struggle. On one side, we have the fact that our society wouldn’t be where it is today without it. On the other side, our society may not be able to continue to exist because of it. However, one thing that must be done is to continue to focus on innovation without compromising safety or value. If we can do this, then we can continue to enjoy the benefits that the Industrial Revolution has provided.


{{< css.inline >}}
<style>
.front-main a {
	color: #7f7fff;
}
</style>
{{< /css.inline >}}